Now to to human DNA and our great guest
this evening
Sid Mukherjee.
Back in 2001 when the Pulitzer committee
awarded Sid the non-fiction prize, it
praised The Emperor of All Maladies as
quote an elegant inquiry
at once clinical and personal.
Well, he's done it again in his new book
The Gene which tells the story of the
development of genetics by weaving
science and social history with some
personal narrative
about his own relatives.
As Sid recalls in the acknowledgements,
he was actually so physically and
mentally exhausted after Emperor
that he hadn't expected to write another
book.
But The Gene turns out to be a natural
pairing with Emperor,
a sort of prequel
he calls it in that it focuses on
biological normalcy before things get
distorted into the malignancy of cancer.
If you've ever wondered how much of our
lives is determined by our genes versus
how much depends on external
environmental factors you need to read
Sid's new book.
But don't expect a simple answer
because as you'll hear from Sid in a
minute it's complicated.
A word about Sid's own past as far back
as his student days which were just a
couple of decades or so ago he was
already distinguishing himself. He
attended Stanford, won a Rhodes, studied
immunology at Oxford, then went to
Harvard Medical School. Today he's an
assistant professor of medicine at
Columbia University and a staff cancer
physician at Columbia's Medical Center.
Sid's going to be in conversation here
this evening with someone who has
obviously made excellent use of her own
genes Judy Woodruff the co-anchor and
managing editor of the PBS NewsHour and
one of the most accomplished journalism
in television today. So please join me
in welcoming both Sid Mukherjee and Judy
Woodruff.
Thank you Brad Graham for that very
gracious. Nobody's ever introduced me
before by saying good genes.
What you have there.
Except when they were talking about my
blue jeans I guess. Thank you.
If you were captivated by
The Emperor of All Maladies, you will be
more than captivated by The Gene Thank
you for saying that.
an intimate history.
I feel like my mic is a little bit loud
so
I I was trying to suggest that.
to speak softly.
Um
Sid, there there are so many things so
many ways I'd like to begin but but I
think hearing your personal story about
why after you had completed the the
years you had worked on the book about
cancer and as we just heard from Brad,
you said you were exhausted by that but
then something else was going on in your
mind about your own family and you write
about that in a in a way that just pulls
every reader in in the very beginning of
the book. What happened? I mean what was
going on in your life that caused you to
even think about writing this? So um
Interestingly I think I I I conceived of
The Gene that I hadn't think of it as
the as that's the name of the book but I
thought about The Gene for a long time
simply because I as I was growing up I
had this um
crisscrossing history of mental illness
in my family schizophrenia and bipolar
disease in particular. I had two uncles
one with schizophrenia and one with
bipolar disease. They actually died
living having lived with that
for many years. One of these uncles
lived with my family
while I was growing up was very much
very much part of my family.
And then
um sometime in my childhood my cousin
again from my father's side all the same
side of family was also diagnosed and
institutionalized.
And that
uh
you know that
elephant in the room
I suppose it's the right analogy for
India but um
that elephant in the room could not go
away would not go away. You know like
most Bengali families my parents had
elevated denial to a museum grade art
and but they couldn't deny it anymore
especially my father couldn't deny it
anymore the idea that this was very much
part of his life mental illness that
the heredity component of mental
illness. And that's when we began to
talk about it. So while I was in medical
school, while I was writing Emperor,
while I was treating patients all of
this history the story was constantly in
the back. It was like a buzz that goes
in the back of your head, you know
am I exposed am I vulnerable who else is
what does it look like what you know is
it a trigger that that's needed that I
that that's that's missing or present
etc. So this story was my story long
before
cancer was my story or became my story.
And in fact when I finished writing
Emperor of of All Maladies I thought to
myself maybe I won't write another book
I'll be done and then I kept coming back
to this idea, you know
this this idea of and as I said it it
was like
it was like Star Wars it was like a
prequel to the sequel. You
You dedicate the book to two people.
We're going to get to one of them in a
minute but one of them was your own
grandmother
Yeah. because she was involved very much
in taking care of your uncles who were
as you say mentally ill. And so there's
a powerful story there. There's also a
story I want you to just read a little
bit from the start of the book where you
were with your father and you went to
visit your cousin.
Yeah. Um you want to Yeah, I'll just
read a little bit from that just to you
know this is where the
this is where the story really begins.
Uh
So this is actually just the the very
first um
the very first this is a prologue of the
book.
Um it's
titled Families
and it's got a little
epigram the blood of your parents is not
lost in you.
It's got another epigram I'm going to
read the other epigram.
Um
In the winter of 2012 I traveled from
Delhi to Calcutta to visit my cousin
Moni.
My father accompanied me as a guide and
companion but he was a sullen and
brooding presence lost in a private
anguish that I could only sense dimly.
My father is the youngest of five
brothers and Moni is his firstborn
nephew the eldest brother's son.
Since 2004 when he was 40
Moni has been confined to an institution
for the mentally ill with a diagnosis of
schizophrenia.
He's kept densely medicated a wash in a
sea of assorted antipsychotics and
sedatives and has an attendant watch,
bathe and feed feed him throughout the
day.
My father has never accepted Moni's
diagnosis. Over the years he has waged a
lonely counter campaign against the
psychiatrist charged with his nephew's
care hoping to convince them that their
diagnosis was somehow a colossal error
or that Moni's broken psyche
would somehow magically mend itself.
My father has visited the institution in
Calcutta twice once without warning
hoping to see a transformed Moni
living a secretly normal life behind the
barred gates.
But my father knew and I knew that there
was more than just
avuncular love at stake for him in these
visits.
Moni's not the only member of my brother
father's family with mental illness.
Of my father's four brothers two
suffered from various unravelings of the
mind.
Madness it turns out has been among the
Mukerjis for at least two generations
and at least part of my father's
reluctance to accept Moni's diagnosis
lies in his grim recognition that some
kernel of the illness might be buried
like toxic waste in himself.
So that's the first paragraph of the
book. So it's in it's in your family.
You saw it when you were growing up. You
heard stories about it. As we said your
grandmother was was very much an
influential figure in your life and you
saw how she
was toward your uncles. And he came to
live with us because he was not no
longer able to take care of himself. So
in this
nuclear family growing up with
the aspirations of a nuclear family in
Delhi was also present um
a remnant of of the past because both of
them had moved in with us by then.
And for you years later as a scientist
um
just the idea that in your family you
were constantly right thinking about
this in your family. It was one
generation and the next but it wasn't
everybody in the family. It wasn't every
cousin Absolutely not. Yeah. was
certainly not you. Um but that's that
was the impetus that brought you to
think we need you you wanted to spend
more time looking at The Gene the
genetic mystery.
There's a connection to cancer the first
book but you really were embarking on a
completely different and ambitious story
that you wanted to tell. And and
you know I I published a small excerpt
from this book in The New Yorker on
schizophrenia
with a picture of me and my father.
That was really the first thing I ever I
really wrote. I sat on it for many many
years. I didn't publish it. I didn't
didn't do anything with it. But it's the
first thing that I wrote. In fact it was
the first thing that I wrote once I
finished Emperor. And I wrote it
privately didn't publish it at all.
Didn't give it out to anyone. It was
just part of my
healing or writing process. And what's
interesting about it, I went back to it
now that you know, you're you're sitting
down here. I went back to it and
genetics at least it doesn't really rear
its full head in that in that little
thing that I wrote back then. It's about
family, which is why the prologue is
called families. The idea of genetics
the idea of genetic genes doesn't come
into it. It it's a reminder that you
know, we think of this word gene and
it's suffused our culture and it seems
to be sort of an abstract concept that
lies outside ourselves in science. You
know, people are talking about it in
laboratories.
But family genes have to do with family.
It has to do with us. It has to do with
how you and I are made our you know, who
in this room doesn't have
a relative who's affected by some
illness which you can ultimately track
back to some interaction between genes
and and environment. So all of a sudden
when I look back at that at that little
thing that was more than probably six or
seven pages. I said to myself, you know,
this book is really this not this book.
It was seven pages then this is really
about families. It's about ourselves as
living organisms that emanate out of
these things called genes and that's
sort of the conception of the book.
You you wrote this and before I ask you
about you know, some of the history here
and some of the amazing figures you
write about.
You write this with a sense I mean I get
a sense of real urgency from you that
you felt it was it was important to get
this down now because there's a lot
going on in science and
you and I talked about this earlier
today. You had a sense that it's really
important for people to begin to
understand themselves not to just leave
this up to the experts.
Uh-huh.
Um well, let me just give you a sense of
what's going on in science and this may
help us have this conversation as you
move forward.
We're
trying we're learning to read and write
the human genome and I'm saying this
very flatly because I let me explain
what what reading and writing the human
genome means.
Reading by reading I I I mean that you
know, obviously all of you know that in
around 2001 2002 we obtained the
sequence of the human genome
and by that I mean but let's first
define what the genome is. A genome is
the entire repository of genetic
information that is in
your cells
that's in an embryo that's in human
embryos and it's written in just four
it's a four alphabet code ACGT. So
your genome might read ACGTCCC
I'm making it up. GGG I'm not having
memorized it.
TTTCCC and so forth.
But here's what's interesting about it.
This goes on in humans for 3 billion
letters
and
if you imagine it as a
written as an encyclopedia
this encyclopedia would be
full sets of the Encyclopedia
Britannica.
So it would line up all the edges of
this room and if you picked up 66 one of
these 66 full sets of the Encyclopedia
Britannica
it would read ACTGCCCC
it would be inscrutable to you and me.
And yet
here's what's amazing about it. Yet out
of that seemingly inscrutable four
letter code
is built you and me and everyone else in
that room. It's an astonishing fact
that that code becomes you becomes me
small variations in that code are
responsible in some part the difference
between you and me. So
going back now to understand what we
what the technologies allow us to do.
Number one is that we're beginning to
read that code and beginning to and I
should emphasize very clearly that we're
beginning to
be able to predict
what might be what or what might happen
in your future for some parts of that
genome.
Just to give you one example
if you have the BRCA1 gene mutation
um
it's not a 100% chance that you're going
to have breast cancer but your risk of
breast cancer may be 10 times higher
than the and and than women who don't
have that particular mutation.
If you have the cystic fibrosis gene
mutation in both your both your
both parental and and from both your
father and mother the chances are nearly
100% that you will have that disease in
your future. I could tell you that
when you were an embryo.
If you had the Tay-Sachs disease
mutation I could tell you from your
embryo from your embryonic cell I could
tell you chances that you will have that
disease is 100% etc. etc. etc. So that's
reading the genome and now we're getting
to more complicated things. I could tell
you more potentially more complicated
things about illness
and people have started to explore far
from the area but people have started to
explore not just illness but I could
tell you complicated things about
potentially our identity.
Um
that's already entering
territory that we should have some
moral concerns about. That's one.
And writing the genome means that not
only can I do that in just just reading
it I can actually go now and make
directional changes intentional changes
in the human genome using a whole new
set of technologies astonishing
technologies that we've hijacked from
bacteria and learned to use as humans.
And these technologies allow us to go
into that 66 volume encyclopedia again
remember 66 volumes
pick out one volume
erase one word in that encyclopedia put
it back in
leaving we think we're not sure about
yet leaving
all the other 66 volumes untouched.
So
it seems to me that once we've acquired
these technologies we need to talk about
them. We need to talk about them. You
need to learn about them. I need to
learn about them. We cannot let this
happen in the laboratory.
Last week there was a closed door
meeting
at at Harvard
where they proposed synthesizing the
entire human genome by
stitching together single single single
ACTGs basically like a little bead on a
string.
In other words, you could synthesize
technologies would soon become available
that you could take the entire human
genome and make it from scratch.
Not a science fiction fantasy. We're not
there yet but all the technologies that
allow us to get there are being
assembled and this is the time to think
about things. This is the time to for me
to think about mental illness for you to
think about
whatever other illnesses and
mechanisms of variation and and identity
that you may may be interested in. This
is the time to think about it. This is
the time to to converse about it and if
you don't we will give this unbelievably
important piece of our history and our
future
to people that we might not want to give
it to.
And you in the book among other things
you write about period not so long ago
when the study of genetics was heading
off in a really terrible direction and
we know it led to some pretty
horrible things on this planet
but I want to touch I want you to go
back though to on a little bit of the
history here because you so much of what
you just described said it happened in
the last 10 or 15 years or even last
maybe last month.
But
you know, you also you know, it's
humbling to know that Aristotle was
thinking about this
and that the information kind of sat
there and then it was another couple of
thousand years before
almost a thousand years before
Charles Darwin started doing his work
and then after that some other really
interesting characters and you they're
almost these signposts along the way of
people who worked on genetics or worked
on what they may not have even known was
genetics but it all came together later
to be critical. Talk a little bit about
some of that early work that was done.
People know Charles Darwin.
Right. Uh but but
Well, let's start with I mean you know,
what's interesting about it and
certainly we'll touch on Aristotle in a
second. What's interesting about it is
that of course this is a perennial
question. I mean since the dawn of human
history you can imagine one of the first
questions we asked ourselves is why do
we look like our parents
or why do we why we not look like our
parents? These two simultaneous
contradictions the yin and yang the two
strands as it were of these questions
have been part of our DNA cultural DNA
forever. Who hasn't asked that question?
When when illness strikes a family
we've asked ourselves why did it not
strike
my father or my mother? Why is it mine?
And so forth. I mean variations when two
identical twins are born we say well why
do they look like the same and so forth.
So Aristotle had a theory about this.
Aristotle really began to think about
this very seriously.
And it's an astonishing fact that you
know, Aristotle
was a was an okay philosopher but he was
a very good biologist. Um
uh
Which I venture to say most people
didn't realize.
Yes. You know, actually what's
interesting about Aristotle at least
from reading him from my very particular
tinted lenses I see him as a biologist
completely. I see him as a philosopher
only secondarily. His his philosophy
really emanated out of his desire to
taxonomize to divide the world up in
different organic forms. You know, what
was form look like what was So Aristotle
realized or he made the argument that
what was really moving what was really
being transmitted across generations was
message or some kind of message. And he
he has a lovely phrase. He said it's a
little bit like
a carpenter shaping
a a piece of wood.
The carpenter when the carpenter shapes
a piece of wood he was talking about how
organisms are formed how human being is
formed. He said when a carpenter shapes
a piece of wood, he doesn't shape it by
by in a material way. What he does is he
transmits a an information as it were
through his handywork or her handywork
into that piece of wood.
And that's what happens. He's
transmitting information, a message into
that piece of wood and that's what makes
that wood piece of wood acquire whatever
form. This was back in, you know, I
don't know when I don't remember exactly
when I say I you know I exactly when
that point of time when he writes this,
but this was back in the day when people
were debating about, you know, how
gods gave us forms and so forth. So,
that's Aristotle and then there's a long
silence really after that. For a while
people thought, I'll give you one more
highlight for me and then we'll come to
more modern characters. For a while
people thought that um
this was the greatest one of them all.
For a while people thought that in fact,
this was so complicated. I mean they
they said why how on earth can a fully
formed human being, an embryo, develop
out of
the you know the
when when when a when a when a woman
conceives, how can that possibly happen?
And they made the argument there was an
argument made in the 1600s that in fact
a tiny miniature human being
was
sitting inside sperm.
Right. Right? Wrapped up like this and
in fact they drew pictures of it too.
And
and if you thought about it carefully,
then it had to be the case that since
that animal since that homunculus as it
was called would also generate its own
children, a mini homunculus had to be
sitting inside that homunculus.
Right?
And so forth. And so on. Infinitely.
Infinitely. Infinitely miniaturized
homunculi, which was a lovely idea of
course. A little crazy if you think
about it, like Russian dolls stretching
out towards
towards towards the future.
Um but this was the most actually this
was one of the most
popular ideas about what how we
transmitted likeness, which was of
course the center of of of of the gene.
So so but but the information but what
he figured out or what he thought about
and shared really kind of sat there as
we said for a couple of thousand years.
Along comes Charles Darwin who did some
important work
Yeah. uh in all this. But then there
were some others who came along who
really were not appreciated at the time.
One of them was a monk
Yes. who you spends I think some really
interesting pages Yes.
on. Um it's it's it's a it's a
fascinating story and um
so and that's Gregor Mendel.
Um Gregor Mendel really launches the
book and the modern history of of genes.
And
because Mendel realizes Mendel performed
Mendel's a monk actually it's very
interesting that both Darwin and Mendel
are monks.
It's instructive about our times that in
in
there was a time
that people with spiritual lives found
no contradiction between exploring the
universe in its material form as well as
having spiritual lives. Someone should
read Darwin and Mendel or force people
to read Darwin and Mendel. Um
I suppose they've they've uh you know
the the the the the capacity and the
compassion that they brought to that and
the passion that they brought to that to
their individual um scientific
explorations was incredible. But Mendel,
fascinating character, he was a monk
um and he began
to do extremely simplified experiments.
That was his trick. He was a great
gardener.
And his trick his his main
um insight was to simplify this this
morass of ideas around genetics, you
know, homunculus is sitting inside
homunculus. And he said I'm going to
forget all about that in a second and
all I'm going to do is I'm going to
study with almost monastic
concentration. I'm going to study what
happens to one or two, he actually
seven,
seven individual features across
multiple generations of peas.
Right?
Here were people talking about, you
know,
hugely complex experiments about human
embryology and how we were born. There
was Mendel sitting in a small monastery
at the edge of the city of Brno
where he said all I'm going to do is I'm
going to study seven characters. I'm
going to map them as they move. He
didn't coin the word gene. He had no
idea what these things were.
And at the end of it, just by
mathematical reasoning, he realized that
there has got to be something that that
units of information, again going back
to Aristotle, units of information must
be passing between the parent and the
offspring.
And he was trying to understand if he in
fact he wanted to work with mice but his
uh superiors wouldn't let him. That's
right because because because mice was a
little bit too risky. I mean peas
they're far away enough from us but mice
is a little risky. I have a great little
story but so I spent some time in
Mendel's monastery. It's it's a
beautiful place. Um and one quick story
and we'll move on but um
I went to Mendel's monastery in Brno and
I had traveled you know it's it's it's a
it you can get to it easily from Vienna
but it's a little bit of a of a schlepp.
So I traveled over to um to Mendel's
monastery and I arrived there and I uh
there was a woman at the front desk and
and I said can I I've come all this way
I want to go and see this this the
birthplace of biology, right? The the
place it was like a pilgrimage for me.
And she said I'm sorry you have to apply
in triplicate. Um
the monastery's closed.
So I said this is the Czech Republic. So
I said so I I pleaded. I said I beg you.
I said I've come from all this way. It's
all I want to do is I want to be inside.
I want to see the library. And she said
no no no you have to send an application
and I said well who do I apply to?
And completely without any irony she
said to me.
And so I'm from India and I said two can
play at this game. So I said I hereby
apply to you.
With a little bow I said I hereby apply
to you. And so she was defeated and she
let me
She let me in. So that was my trip to
Mendel's monastery. I spent you know I
spent about four five days not in the
you can't stay there but I spent four
five days going back and forth being in
the library looking at that first garden
where he planted those peas that
generated this thing which is now taken
over the world. And his the work that he
did wasn't appreciated for a long time.
In fact it sat obscure and he was
scorned. Um but at some point somebody
there were a number of other important
figures.
Remind us who came up with the term
genetics? So it was
Somebody gets credit for that. That's
right. It was much later again remember
Mendel doesn't even have that word in
his vocabulary. He knows that he's
stumbled on something interesting but
what's what's amazing about Mendel is
that once he's stumbled he's like a he's
like an he he he is he
Go ahead. No go ahead.
Because he fired up once he had done
this work was so he sent his copies of
his report. He condensed it what to 40
some pages. Sent it out to all these
scholarly centers but it was just
dismissed.
Basically no one basically said, you
know,
basically everyone said what is this
crazy monk writing about and why
Exactly.
why should we be reading this stuff? And
they went on describing botany and
physiology and figuring out you know
trying to figure out how embryos were
formed in their very complicated ways
homunculuses falling into homunculuses
and so forth. God knows but anyway
um
but then in the 1900s Mendel gets
rediscovered. Um and soon after in 1909
um
we find the word gene because botanists
and biologists began to begin to say to
themselves
we've got to have a word for this. I
mean there is this abstract. We don't
know what it is. We don't know what
carries it.
Is it is it a molecule? What what is it
a structure in a cell? But something
carries this information. We know it's
important and and so we've got to have a
word for it. Um
William Bateson, uh one of Mendel's
great uh defenders, I talk about him.
He's a great there's a great picture of
him in the book. Uh coins the word
genetics from genus, generation, genius,
all of these words coming together
um in that in that word. And so he coins
the word gene or genetics and then um
his colleague uh Johannsen says, you
know, that's the discipline. Genetics is
the discipline. It has to we have to
name that thing.
Um and so they name it the gene.
Gene. And and the the work so it fits
and starts. I mean there's progress and
then there's a setback and more progress
and and you do an amazing a wonderful
job of of
bringing to life these people who
uh really probably led pretty
ex un
extraordinary lives. They were stuck in
a lab or in an office somewhere writing
and and uh and working. But and then you
you fast forward to the 1950s to Watson
and Crick. But before you get to that
point, you know, things really go badly
uh off track.
Mhm.
Why did that happen? How did that
happen?
important to remember that this So so
and it's important to remember that off
track because while the gene is being
explored scientifically, the study of
heredity of course has a long history
and the desire to manipulate heredity is
not you can they were really parallel
studies. Um
and it was in England that
coincidentally in fact Darwin's cousin
uh Francis Galton uh invented the term
eugenics. Um
Galton didn't know very much about genes
actually. He had a terrible theory of
genetics themselves. He made a mistake.
Uh it was kind of a homunculus funnily
enough. Uh the mathematical homunculus I
talk about it in the book but we'll
we'll set that aside for a second but
Galton's a fascinating character uh
fascinating character. He was a great
mathematician, a great statistician.
But he also lived in Darwin's shadow all
his life. Um
I call Galton you know he's slung
between Darwin and Mendel. I mean can
you imagine these two giants and you're
supposed to Galton was supposed to be an
epic giant himself. He was a child
prodigy and tried
of course had many important
contributions to to statistics and
mathematics. But Galton coins this term
eugenics because he thinks that
regardless of what the gene is, whether
there's a gene or no gene, we can use
human heredity by manipulating heredity,
we can make better human beings. And
Galton's proposal, he coined the word
eugenics, good genes, eugenics, in order
to try to make better human beings. He
thought that if you breed selectively
breed the best human beings, we'll get a
superior and emancipate ourselves. And
here's what's astonishing, which I
discovered,
is that this was considered an
incredibly progressive idea. Like taking
evening walks or you know, getting on
getting constitutional baths in spas and
so forth. This was considered a very
healthy idea for humankind. And many
progressives, some exceptions and some
notable exceptions, actually many
progressives said this is a great idea.
We should do more of this.
And
so that was Galton and it took off in
England and stayed in England. And that
idea then metastasizes
and reaches the shores of this country.
Uh where it mingles with a kind of
Yankee practicality
and becomes
it it morphs into
not just let's breed the best, let's
sterilize those who
are carry bad genes.
Which ultimately sort of escalates
slowly and leads to a case that many
people know, Carrie Buck's case. Carrie
Buck was a woman who was accused of
having genetic imbecility
and sterilized on that pretext. And
famously the
Oliver Wendell Holmes, the
so-called great judicial moderate,
the case climbed to his court and he
said, "Three generations of imbeciles is
enough."
Um
and Carrie Buck was moved to a
uh
state
colony it was called then
and she was forcibly uh
narcotized, taken to an operating
theater and sterilized on that pretext.
And there was no real evidence that she
had any mental mental illness at all.
Books and books have been written about
it and there is basically no evidence
that she she was a she was if if
anything she was a you know, she was a
she was she was a bit of a rebel. That
was the worst of her sins. And you you
were saying to me earlier today that you
felt it was so important and you she's
one of the two people you dedicate the
book to. It's so important to remind
everybody that this is happening that
this happened. It's not just Nazi
Germany Yes. Where things Well, so let's
just finish up that story. Thanks for
catching me. The it metastasizes again
and then moves from selective breeding
to selective sterilization
to selective extermination.
And that that is the that's the that's
the final incarnation. That's the final
and the macabre incarnation that
eugenics takes, which we now remember it
by. We remember Nazi eugenics. Um you
know, beginning with
people who had again mental illness,
moving on to things like depression and
ultimately moving on to the
racial and ethnic and
human cleansing that the Nazis brought
to their full macabre form. And I put
that right in the middle of the book. In
fact, I wanted to start the book with
with that idea.
It just that but then I realized that
that the I wanted to start the book
actually with the with with with the
with the with the kind of the German
episode.
But I realized that it's much much more
chilling
to watch it happen in in your own in
front of your own eyes that this that
the road to that
menace
the road to that ghastliness was paved
in progressive by progressive feet.
By a desire to indeed a desire to
emancipate, the desire for
perfectibility, the desire to make
ourselves better ends up in less than 30
years
in the extermination of someone who has
a mild form of mental illness.
I think we all want to believe that that
could never happen again, but as you
said a moment ago, because of
um the incredible advances that have
just been met in made in such a short
time
that people really still don't
understand. What do you think the
possibility is that that decisions could
get made right now or in the near future
that not not a repetition of some of the
the worst of what you describe, but we
could head off in a direction
that it might be very hard to turn
around and and correct.
of examples and and they're relevant
today. I'll give you one local so one
example from the United States and one
example from internationally.
I think I think that I personally think
being
having read this story, I think it's
very unlikely that we will have a
state-mandated form of eugenics in the
United States in the future. I don't
think that's likely. I think what's
interesting and what's much more what's
much what's more much more difficult to
contend with is that we're entering an
era of personalized eugenics in which we
can can sequence this was going to be
this is this technology is available
today.
Very soon you should be able to sequence
and people have done this already in
other countries every single gene of
your unborn child.
Um
and the question you need to ask
yourself is what do we do with this
information?
Well, you won't know what to do with
this information unless you know what
genes are and how they interact with
what they produce.
So that's that's of course one arena
that is important. But meanwhile, let's
not forget that the largest numerically
the largest eugenics project is already
going on in India and China.
Um in some parts of India, there are 700
women to 1,000 men.
In human history, there has never been
this skew of gender ratios. That is a
eugenics project. Let's not make any
bones about it. That is a dysgenics
project
fostered by science
beginning with
ultrasound diagnosis ending up with
you know,
amniocentesis and gender diagnosis
through chromosomal analysis etc.
Ladies and gentlemen, you know, you
welcome to a dysgenic world. It's
already we are already part of it. And
it has destabilized societies there. It
has destabilized the way we think about
it. So it's not someone else's it's not
some other world's problem. This is our
world's problem. And the faster we
accept it and the more we understand it,
the more armed we will be enabled to
mitigate against its effects
internationally.
It it's a it's clearly a case of the
science
being ahead of where uh
governments, policy makers are uh
are prepared uh to make decisions. Um
but how much of that is is a practical
uh effect right here in the United
States right now. I mean, you talked a
minute you talked a minute ago said
about the work that's being done to edit
genes and what you just said about
creating a gen a person synthetically.
Creating a genome the question is how to
do it. Um how
you know, how how much do scientists
talk about that? I mean, you're a
scientist yourself. How much do
scientists sit around and worry about
that? Think about it. Uh and how much do
they talk to policy makers? Well, they
think a lot. They worry a lot about it.
The policy makers don't have the
language to understand what the
implications are often. Um in fact, the
scientists don't have scientists don't
have the language at all. There's an
important meeting which I describe in
the book that happens in Asilomar, of
the famous Asilomar conference, when
actually the my my mentor for many
years, Paul Berg, I worked in with Paul
for many many years. We're still very
close friends.
Um Paul and several others, two or three
other scientists, discovered the
technology to cut and paste genes
together.
This in the 1970s. He won a Nobel Prize
for this. Um and essentially it's
relatively simple technology. It is you
take one piece of DNA um and you cut it
up using tiny molecular scissors that
are made by bacteria to kill each other.
And you stitch them together with
another enzyme, another
factor, which is used normally when your
when your DNA strands break because of
x-rays, say, something needs to stitch
them back together to maintain their
integrity. If you just combine these two
little pieces, these two pieces, you can
suddenly start taking a gene from a frog
and stitching it together with a gene
from a virus.
You can take you can take two genes of
any sort. And
this is of course incredibly important
technology.
Cancer drugs are made this way. Uh you
take and because the genetic code is
uniform and universal, you can take a
gene from a blue whale and put it into a
monkey or monkey cells and the monkey
cells will recognize it for all intents
and purposes as if it was a monkey gene
and make it as if it was a monkey gene.
That's because we are all evolved from
the same original
organisms and we share the same genetic
code.
So
when this technology was first created
scientists got together for and and and
and created an open meeting
um at Asilomar. Journalists came.
Bioethicists came. Policy makers came.
They all spent months reading. There was
no document about the gene, but they all
spent months thinking about you know,
they collecting all information that
they could, learning the vocabulary. And
and then they had a meeting in which
they said, "We're going to put a
voluntary moratorium
for 1 year." It lasted a bit longer. For
1 year before we can figure out what the
next steps are because this technology
may unleash biological catastrophe.
Um so it is possible, I think, at least
within the United States to put
moratoria on things before we figure out
what to do with them. And in fact, about
2 weeks ago about 2 months ago there was
a large conference
uh which they suggested that there
should be a moratorium on
editing human genes in particular kinds
of cells. Certainly not every cell, but
embryonic stem cells of certain kinds,
um although that's unlikely to happen,
but but certainly human human human
embryos.
Uh meanwhile, just to finish up,
meanwhile there's an experiment in China
that was published where they went ahead
and tried to make a um gene define
genetic gene editing in a human embryo.
And they were non-viable embryos, but
they tried 76 embryos, I think, at a try
to make a defined genetic change.
And what what happened? What was the
result? Well, the results we don't know
fully the results because it's you know,
they were it was it was published a
little piecemeal, and again, they were
non-viable embryos, so um but the quick
answer is that in principle, they could
make genetic changes in human embryos.
And what does that mean? I mean, what
That means that in principle, you could
uh if you tweak the technology, if you
do quite a lot of tweaking, but if you
tweak the technology, you could say to
yourself that I'm interested in
and I talk about how you might tweak
that in in the real world. The Chinese
experiment is actually a not a great way
to do that experiment. But if you tweak
the technology, you could say, "I'm
going to I'm going to try to erase the
cystic fibrosis mutation from my genetic
heritage.
I'm going to try to erase the or change
a mutation or a variation that causes
Alzheimer's disease from my heritage.
Um
And in the bizarre-est scenario, you
could say, "I want to add information
back to the human genome."
Um
which you could do. You could add
information to the human genome. We want
to make people taller or something.
Again, again to remind us, so and I talk
about this, that's very important to
realize, tallness or height is certainly
genetic, but at least five or seven
genes govern that.
Could you change five or seven genes?
Maybe you can. Maybe you could change
five At least now we're changing one.
But but but also, you as I said, you can
add information back to the human
genome. That That is a That's a
surprising thing. We shouldn't we should
take that very
very very seriously.
All right, we're going to be taking
questions from all of you in just a
couple of minutes, but before we do, I
want to I mean, just how do we make sure
So be thinking about your questions. But
how do we make sure that this
kind of work goes in the right direction
and not someplace that we don't even
want to think about.
Right.
Well, I think there has to be an
international consensus. A national
consensus won't help because the next
thing you know, there's going to be an
arms race. China, Korea, India will make
start making genetic interventions in
and actually outline one possibility,
one kind of thought experiment. You
know, there's a famous thought
experiment that happened when the when
when when the atom was being split. You
know, long before the atomic bomb was
made, there's a famous letter that
Szilard and Einstein wrote
saying, you know, there's no such thing
as the atomic bomb, but here's a thought
experiment. Just think us walk just in
your brain, walk through this process,
and you land up with the unleashing of
immense power in a in a concentrated
manner. Um and Einstein even writes to
Szilard and say say
writes to the president and says,
"This could create a weapon of great
destruction." Um nothing's been made
yet. It's just that you can walk the
physical the mental steps to it. So, I
think we need to walk those mental steps
first and figure out what the realm of
possibilities is, and we need to walk
those mental steps internationally so
that we can figure out again what the
realm of controls is. And I actually
have I I I suggest a a kind of framework
um by which we can we hopefully with
that that we can stick to before we
enter an era that we don't want to
enter.
So, we're going to take questions, and I
So, I guess there are a couple of
microphones. Before they come to the
mic, um said I you know, when I when I
think about what you do, and I think
about the book you wrote on cancer and
the work you did with public television
with WETA, and I should say Sharon
Rockefeller here, who's the is here,
who's the president of WETA, who worked
with you on the and Ken Burns film
around uh and Ken Burns
uh around uh The Emperor of All
Maladies. Um and I
and I think how do you even have time to
sleep because you are a scientist,
you're an oncologist, you write books,
you're a husband and a father, and you
have a life. How do you do it all? Well,
you know, this book came out of such
urgency that it had to be written. Um I
sort of prioritized this
book over everything else. It took
five and a half years. So, it
you know, it seems as if it it came up
one morning, but it it took five and a
half years. It took a lot of time, and I
spent a lot of time on it, and a lot of
it was going back to these stories. I
talked to myself, "If I can just knit
together the stories one after another,
I would achieve I would achieve the
book."
Well, it's uh it's kind of extraordinary
that he can get it all done. All right,
let's start over here, and I can't see
very well, but step up to the mic and
ask your question.
Hi. Uh my name is Andy, and I'll be
starting school in the fall to study the
intersections of epigenetics and
anthropology. Uh-huh. And um
just had a question for you regarding um
kind of along the lines of this
discussion of exploring the new
frontiers of science. Uh-huh. Um um
drawing upon some of the work that
you've done on epigene- or you've
written about in epigenetics. Um I think
we're starting to find a lot uh more
information and evidence about the
intergenerational and transgenerational
um
like transmissions and inheritance of
epigenetic information, and I was
wondering, in the spirit of this
conversation about understanding the
ethical and social um considerations of
new scientific findings, um what those
would be for um intergenerational and
transgenerational Yeah, so let me
rephrase the question. It is a very
important question. The question is um
to what extent We We know that genes
transmit information across generations.
But lately, there's been a lot of
interest in finding out whether your
things that happen to you in the
environment um can also be transmitted
across generations. The evidence for
that, I think, is very very minimal uh
right now. It's a totally unexplored
frontier. Um
the famous experiment, of course, was
Weismann's experiment in which he
dismembered the
gruesome experiment, but he dismembered
the tail of one generation of mice, and
he waited for the next mouse to be born,
and it grew perfectly intact tail, and
he dismembered that, and the next
generation was born with a tail. And so,
he kept doing this for multiple
generations, and not even 1 cm of tail
was lost. So, we know that, you know, as
significant a trauma, as it were, as
having a part of your
body cut off in the case of of that of
that poor mouse,
does not register across multiple
generations. It does not get
transmitted.
And yet, we also there are some inklings
that, for instance, starvation, the
starvation response, creates changes
that are transmitted across multiple
generations in in ways that we still
don't still don't understand. It's an
entirely new frontier, and of course, it
challenges the classical model of how
genes transmit information, and we're
still trying to figure out what what you
know, what what is it? What is What is
really What is the information that's
being transmitted?
What's amazing about it, and I think I
got I'll I'll just finish with this
idea. What's amazing about it is that
genes actually protect us from that.
Genes were almost designed to wash away
the sins of our ourselves and our
fathers. We reproduce, and all of a
sudden, all the scars and things that we
have in our body are washed away, and a
baby is formed anew. It's a very
beautiful thing that that It's a very
beautiful solution to regeneration. But
there is evidence now from, again, very
detailed studies on starvation and and
other um in simple organisms that seem
to have some effect across generations.
We'll have to find out more about it.
We're going to have to find a somewhat
more cheerful aspect of
genetics. Yes, sir. Hi. Thank you. My
name is Scott. And uh I you know, for
years, we've had this dichotomy between
genetics and the environment. What
causes
social behaviors even, sociobiology. Uh
and I and I've always thought of this as
a false dichotomy in the sense that
everything is genetic, everything also
is influenced by the environment. And
really, the question is not whether it's
something is genetic or environmentally
caused, it's whether or not how
malleable it is. Can it be changed? You
know, having poor eyesight is genetic,
and yet we can do LASIK surgery, we can
wear glasses, and it doesn't affect our
behavior. It doesn't affect our our
genetic fitness, whatever. So, really,
it's a it's a false question, and I was
hoping you would I I actually I think
it's not it's not just a false question.
I think it's a question that's led us in
the wrong led us in the wrong direction.
Let me tell you what I think about it,
and I write about this in the book
extensively.
What
My thought is that when someone asks
the question, "Is it nature or nurture?
Is it genes or environment?" the first
question we should be asking back is
"What are we talking about? What what
aspect of human behavior or biology are
we talking about?" I'll give you some
concrete examples.
Gender anatomy, the anatomy of gender,
is strikingly genetic.
Um there's one gene
that governs
for the most part, gender anatomy. If
you have it on, it happens to be on the
Y chromosome, unsurprisingly.
If you have that gene, you will have one
particular anatomy of gender and all the
physiology that goes along with it. If
you don't have that gene, you will have
a different anatomy of gender and all
the physiology that goes along with it.
How do we know this? Because if you have
um
uh if you have some um some women
in inherit the XY, so they are
chromosomally male, except that one gene
is mutated.
And if you mutate that one gene, these
women are self-described as women.
They have most of their gender anatomy
intact. They They're often diagnosed as
a syndrome called Swyer syndrome, and
they're diagnosed because they are they
experience infertility. So, gender
anatomy strikingly
governed by genes.
Gender identity,
on the other hand, is a complex mixture,
we know that. So, the idea and and I
talk about these distinctions in the
book. So, the idea that that now we've
made a a kind of armistice between genes
and environment is actually a fool's
armistice. There is no armistice. It
depends on what level or what what what
level of hierarchy we're examining. It
depends on the question you're
examining. And it's it's amazing to me
that in this culture in 2016, the human
mind is not capacious enough
to understand this simple idea, that
some things can be strikingly dominated
by genes, some things can be strikingly
dominated by environments, and some
things live in the middle. It depends on
what we're asking about. So, thank you
for saying thank saying that. Thank you.
Yes. Would you please elaborate on the
recent developments in treating cancer
with gene modification, particularly
breast cancer? Yeah, so um
the
Right now, we're
all of these technologies, and this goes
back to the to the point that we're
trying to make. All these technologies
can have very powerful effects uh and a
lot of promise.
So, one of the things that uh
the brain cancer one is the one that
comes very quickly to mind. There's a
couple of very recent, important, and
potentially striking trials of gene
therapy in brain cancer using various
genetic therapies um
uh to treat brain cancers. Um
certainly in Now, let me let me give you
uh you know, the idea of genes being
used in breast cancer has a rich history
starting with diagnosis. BRCA1 and BRCA2
were identified uh genetically um years
ago and have really changed the lives of
um women who have happen to have that
mutation.
Herceptin, that antibody, guess how we
make that antibody. The only way to make
Herceptin as an antibody is to take a
human gene for an antibody and put it in
a in a cell using that same technique
that I all talked about, Paul Berg's and
others' technique. And that's the only
way you can make Herceptin. So,
when you talk about genes in cancer,
they run the gamut from diagnosis to
genetic therapies to the creation of new
drugs.
We would not be here in cancer today
were it not for genetics and genetic
engineering in particular. Thank you.
How much promise do you feel there is in
that area? Um
Again, it depends on which which arena.
I mean, certainly with you know,
antibody therapies for cancer are one of
the most striking therapies these days.
So, we are doing more and more. We're
using them more and more. Again, would
not be possible without genetic
engineering. Genetics was used to figure
out what an antibody was in the first
place. You wouldn't know what an
antibody was, how your immune system
worked if it wasn't for genetics. So, um
genes underlie all of these all of these
um really miraculous advances.
Yes. Let me Sorry, you see you give
another the most obvious example. You
know, remember this uh
distinction in breast cancer between ER
and PR. You know, we talk about ERPR.
Guess what those are? Genes.
Estrogen receptor's a gene. Progesterone
receptor's a gene. If it it's a marker
for um for certain kinds of cancer. And
if you would didn't know that, we
wouldn't know how to treat cancer breast
cancer with tamoxifen. And the doctors
physicians have had to
learn this very quickly.
Absolutely. Had to learn all that
genetics very very quickly.
Yes. Thank you.
What do you make of or how close do you
think we are to potentially getting a
cure for cancer? And do you think
efforts like President's Cancer Moonshot
and others like Sean Parker and other
Silicon Valley folks are trying
to kind of get toward a cure? How close
do you think we we might be?
So, cure is a complicated word in cancer
um because it depends on the kinds of
cancer that we're talking about. Um it
has a very rich history detailed in
another book. Uh
uh
that um
If if you ask me about what I think
about these moonshot efforts, I think
they're helpful in some ways and they
can be helpful in others. I think
they're helpful because they refocus our
attention at a time when our attention
span seems to have degenerated and we're
talking about
what I think are rather irrelevant
issues when we when when they're very
clearly focused issues that we should be
talking about, how to emancipate our
health problems, um how to help
ourselves, how to help the economy, and
so forth. And so, rather than focusing
on things that are not constructive, I
think they allow us to rebuild faith in
in in systems uh whether they be
federally funded, whether they be
philanthropically funded. They rebuild
faith in systems that can provide
medical
uh transformations. So, I think that's
very helpful. The The flip side, of
course, is that that creates a certain
cycle of hope and hype, and people say
they they've not met their, you know,
technologies are not ready yet. They
haven't met their goals. Um
I think the I think the I think the
moonshot will be partially successful
cuz it'll allow us to clear out some
cobwebs that have gotten in the way of
of um advanced medical advances around
cancer. So, I think there will be a
backlash as well. You know, 10 years
from now we'll be sitting in this room
and saying how dare we have said you
know, that there should be a moonshot
for cancer. I think cancers will advance
significantly in the next decade. I'm
I'm confident of that.
Thank you. Okay. Yes. We have time for
two more questions. Okay, thanks.
Hi. Uh we've been talking mostly about
like human genetics, but when it comes
to policy and science being sort of
ahead of of policy, my first thought
goes to GMOs. Yeah.
And my understanding is that there's a
huge gap between what these what is the
scientific consensus consensus consensus
and what the public perception is. Yes.
So, I was just curious in your work
Yeah, you know, to be honest, I actually
did not cover GMOs in this book because
I really think it deserves a full second
book. Uh I I I
I'm not going to write it.
Um
uh
the uh
the the the the issue of of genetically
modified organism. What I do though is I
talk about the technologies to create
transgenic organisms um extensively in
the book, uh but I don't go into the
pros and cons and the plusses and
minuses of genetically modified
organisms. But in brief, um what I would
the one thing I would say is that our
sophistication in being able to create
these organisms is increasing daily. Um
and
that obviously raises the spectrum of
unintended consequences um
in the in the greater biosphere. Um I'm
actually less concerned about the
unintended consequences on human health
locally. I'm more concerned Personally,
I'm more concerned about the greater
unintended consequences in the biosphere
at large, which is a much much larger
conversation
um which we can have another time. But
they important topic. Thank you.
Okay. We won't count that as a question.
We'll count that as a as a a lead into
another conversation. So, we'll take two
more questions.
is almost identical to his. Almost
identical. Okay.
ask
your opinion. Yeah. But but it's
probably just answered. Okay, sounds
good. Thank you.
know your opinion of Yeah, thanks.
All right.
Okay, hi. Um my name's Allison Barrell.
I'm a
graduate student finishing up at the
National Institutes of Health, and um
recently I've gotten uh interested in
science policy. And one of the questions
that you had asked was um
how much do the scientists who do the
science talk to the policy makers. Um
and you had responded something like,
well, the scientists talk science and
the policy makers talk government, and
they don't really communicate very well.
But you do a great job, and lots of
other science writers do a great job of
translating that that really difficult
science talk into understandable
um media. And so, I was just wondering
if you ever get the opportunity to to
talk to policy makers um and participate
in that. Personally, I I do a lot. I'm
in Washington a lot. Um I've been to
Congress several times um
particularly on cancer. In fact, um
we screened part of uh part of Ken
Burns' film um
in Congress. Um so, uh I I do. I think
the problem is not the problem is not
that there isn't meeting spaces or
meeting opportunities. The problem is
that the vocabulary is different. And
once the vocabulary becomes common, once
we talk about the same things, it
actually becomes much much more easy, of
course, to have the conversation. So,
part of the effort I think here is to is
to at least arm ourselves with the
vocabulary so that when you open the
newspaper and someone says, you know,
someone's trying to synthesize the human
genome, at least we understand what that
means. What does the human genome mean?
What does it mean to synthesize the
human genome? What are its implications
down the road? And then we can have a
real conversation. So, thank you for
reminding us that that's the kind of
effort that's um that's ultimately
helpful. We need to have the vocabulary,
as it were. All right, thank you. Okay,
last question. Hello. Um my name is
Marcel. Originally, I'm from the Czech
Republic. So, I understand what it's
like.
Originally, I'm from India, so I
understand what
Let's have a drink.
So, my very simple question. Uh
your opinion, do you think that in the
future we'll be able to
find smaller particles of genes
and for example, identify genes that
define happiness and since we are in the
in the synagogue, genes of spirituality.
These are very interesting and
complicated questions and and and
10 years 15 years ago someone would say
those are crazy questions.
But 15 years later they're not so crazy
questions. I actually talk about this in
the book a lot.
Are there genes for temperament? Are
there genes for personality, etc.
Almost always these things are very
higher order principles as it were.
They lie in intersections between genes
and environments.
But do I feel that some of these
evanescent qualities have
some components of genes at their core?
The answer would be yes. And how do we
know that that the answer is yes? Cuz
very very detailed studies on identical
twins separated at birth. Separate
There's a famous study which I talk
about a lot. In fact, I interviewed the
one of the one of the authors of that
study for this book.
These identical twins separated at birth
brought up in very different
circumstances share surprising kinds of
behavior.
They share
personality traits that you wouldn't
imagine would happen by random chance.
They share preferences, anxieties.
Now what does that mean? That means that
there must be things in the genome that
predispose us
to certain kinds of behaviors,
temperaments, anxieties, etc.
What's also interesting is that if you
look at not identical twins but siblings
that number falls dramatically. What
does that mean? That means that
if you scatter genes around
you'll lose that effect. It's a very
artificial effect. So
it is simultaneously true that there
elements in the genome that may govern
more complex evanescent traits of human
personality and that we it's unlikely
that we'll be able to manipulate them
very easily because there multiple genes
that are that are that are governing
this.
I make the distinction in the book
between the idea that these are
inheritable
but they're not heritable.
It's a great question. Thank you very
much. I think
Apologies for the Yeah, we're going to
have to We're going to have to stop. I
just want to say again said it's a it's
a it's a fascinating book. Uh
Don't be intimidated by the fact that
it's about science because
you write it you write it's it's about
people, it's about family, it's about
it's an it's just done in a in a
remarkably approachable way and it's a
wonderful read and a great book.
Thank you so much.
So it's been my pleasure. Thank you.
Thank you so much to Siddhartha
Mukherjee and thank you to Judy Woodruff
for such a wonderful conversation.
Thanks to all of you for being wonderful
audience.